crates/foundry/README.md, before:

# bulloak-foundry

`bulloak-foundry` is a Rust crate that serves as a backend for generating Foundry tests from `bulloak-syntax` Abstract Syntax Trees (ASTs). It provides functionality to scaffold Solidity test files and check existing tests against specifications.

## Features

- Generate `.t.sol` files with scaffolded Foundry tests from `bulloak-syntax` ASTs.
- Check existing Solidity test files against `.tree` specifications.
- Implement and enforce custom rules for test structure and content.
- Automatic fixing of certain rule violations.

## Usage

To use bulloak-foundry in your project, add it to your `Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[dependencies]
bulloak-foundry = "0.1.0"  # Replace with the actual version
```

### Scaffolding Tests

```rust
use bulloak_foundry::scaffold;

fn main() -> anyhow::Result<()> {
    let tree_spec = "Your .tree specification here";
    let foundry_test = scaffold::scaffold(tree_spec)?;

    // Write foundry_test to a .t.sol file

    Ok(())
}
```

## Violation Checking

`bulloak-foundry` includes a system for defining and checking rules against Solidity test files. Violations can be of different kinds, as defined in the `ViolationKind` enum.

## License

This project is licensed under either of:

- Apache License, Version 2.0, ([LICENSE-APACHE](LICENSE-APACHE) or
  https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).
- MIT license ([LICENSE-MIT](LICENSE-MIT) or
  https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

Commit message:

feat(bulloak): auto-disambiguate function names (#102)

crates/foundry/README.md, after:

# bulloak-foundry

`bulloak-foundry` is a Rust crate that serves as a backend for generating Foundry tests from `bulloak-syntax` Abstract Syntax Trees (ASTs). It provides functionality to scaffold Solidity test files and check existing tests against specifications.

## Features

- Generate `.t.sol` files with scaffolded Foundry tests from `bulloak-syntax` ASTs.
- Check existing Solidity test files against `.tree` specifications.
- Implement and enforce custom rules for test structure and content.
- Automatic fixing of certain rule violations.
- Allow duplicate condition titles; a single modifier per unique title is
  emitted and reused where needed.
- Automatic function name disambiguation: when two tests would clash, `bulloak`
  prepends nearest ancestor conditions (and if needed multiple ancestors) to
  produce a unique name.

## Usage

To use bulloak-foundry in your project, add it to your `Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[dependencies]
bulloak-foundry = "0.1.0"  # Replace with the actual version
```

### Scaffolding Tests

```rust
use bulloak_foundry::scaffold;

fn main() -> anyhow::Result<()> {
    let tree_spec = "Your .tree specification here";
    let foundry_test = scaffold::scaffold(tree_spec)?;

    // Write foundry_test to a .t.sol file

    Ok(())
}
```

## Semantics

- Duplicate condition titles are allowed; modifiers are reused.
- Top‑level actions must be unique (duplicates are an error).
- Non‑top‑level test name clashes are resolved automatically by prepending ancestor conditions.

## Violation Checking

`bulloak-foundry` includes a system for defining and checking rules against Solidity test files. Violations can be of different kinds, as defined in the `ViolationKind` enum.

## License

This project is licensed under either of:

- Apache License, Version 2.0, ([LICENSE-APACHE](LICENSE-APACHE) or
  https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).
- MIT license ([LICENSE-MIT](LICENSE-MIT) or
  https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).
